# Appendix A.3: Optimization Checklists

## Introduction

Performance optimization in graphics processing applications requires systematic evaluation across multiple dimensions.
These checklists provide actionable guidance for identifying and addressing performance bottlenecks throughout the
development lifecycle. Each checklist addresses specific optimization domains, from initial architecture decisions
through production deployment.

## Architecture and Design Optimization Checklist

### Data Structure Selection

Before implementing any graphics processing pipeline, evaluate your data structure choices against performance
requirements. Verify that image representations align with processing patterns - row-major layouts benefit horizontal
filtering operations while column-major layouts optimize vertical processing. Consider whether packed pixel formats (
RGBA as uint32) or planar formats (separate R, G, B, A arrays) better suit your algorithm's memory access patterns.

Assess memory alignment requirements for SIMD operations. Ensure pixel data aligns to appropriate boundaries - 16-byte
alignment for SSE operations, 32-byte for AVX, and 64-byte for AVX-512. Misaligned data can reduce SIMD performance by
up to 50% due to additional load/store operations. Implement custom allocators when necessary to guarantee alignment
requirements.

### Pipeline Architecture

Evaluate whether your processing pipeline minimizes data movement between stages. Each pipeline stage should perform
sufficient work to amortize the cost of cache misses and memory transfers. Consider fusing operations where possible -
combining brightness and contrast adjustments into a single pass eliminates intermediate buffer requirements and reduces
memory bandwidth consumption.

Verify that your pipeline design enables parallel execution. Independent processing stages should execute concurrently
using task parallelism, while data-parallel operations within stages leverage SIMD or GPU acceleration. Implement proper
synchronization mechanisms that minimize contention while ensuring correct operation ordering.

### Memory Management Strategy

Confirm that memory allocation patterns minimize garbage collection pressure. Pre-allocate buffers for known workload
sizes and implement object pooling for frequently created/destroyed objects. The ArrayPool<T> and MemoryPool<T> classes
provide efficient pooling mechanisms that reduce allocation overhead by 80% or more in typical scenarios.

Validate that large allocations use appropriate heap types. Graphics buffers exceeding 85KB allocate on the Large Object
Heap (LOH), which experiences less frequent but more impactful garbage collections. Consider using native memory
allocations for very large buffers to completely avoid GC pressure.

## Code-Level Optimization Checklist

### SIMD Vectorization

Review loops for vectorization opportunities. Any operation applying uniform transformations across pixel arrays
represents a vectorization candidate. Ensure loop bodies contain no conditional branches or function calls that prevent
vectorization. Restructure algorithms to separate vectorizable operations from scalar decision logic.

Verify vector width utilization by checking that operations process Vector<T>.Count elements per iteration. Processing
fewer elements wastes SIMD lanes, while processing more requires multiple vector operations. Implement explicit tail
handling for array sizes not evenly divisible by vector width to maintain correctness without sacrificing performance.

### Memory Access Optimization

Analyze memory access patterns for cache efficiency. Sequential access patterns achieve 10-50x better performance than
random access due to hardware prefetching and cache line utilization. Restructure algorithms to process data in
cache-friendly patterns, such as tiling large images into cache-sized blocks.

Confirm that frequently accessed data structures fit within CPU cache levels. The working set for inner loops should fit
within L1 cache (32-48KB) for optimal performance. Larger working sets should target L2 cache (256KB-1MB) or L3 cache (
8-32MB) boundaries. Profile cache miss rates to identify optimization opportunities.

### Parallel Processing

Evaluate parallel decomposition strategies for multi-core efficiency. Ensure that parallelized work items require
minimal synchronization and exhibit balanced computational loads. Uneven work distribution can limit parallel speedup to
50% or less of theoretical maximum due to thread idle time.

Verify appropriate parallelism granularity. Over-decomposition creates excessive synchronization overhead, while
under-decomposition leaves CPU cores idle. Target work items requiring 1-10 milliseconds of processing time for optimal
balance between parallelism and overhead.

## GPU Acceleration Checklist

### Workload Suitability

Assess whether workloads exhibit characteristics suitable for GPU acceleration. Ideal GPU workloads demonstrate high
arithmetic intensity (operations per byte transferred), minimal branching, and data-parallel execution patterns.
Operations requiring frequent host-device synchronization or exhibiting irregular memory access patterns may perform
poorly on GPUs.

Calculate the break-even point for GPU acceleration by measuring kernel execution time against memory transfer overhead.
Small images often process faster on optimized CPU code due to PCIe transfer latency. Generally, images smaller than 1
megapixel benefit from CPU processing unless multiple operations can be fused into a single GPU kernel.

### Memory Transfer Optimization

Minimize host-device memory transfers by implementing operation fusion and persistent GPU memory allocation. Chain
multiple operations into single kernels when possible, eliminating intermediate transfer requirements. Maintain
GPU-resident buffers for frequently accessed data like lookup tables or convolution kernels.

Utilize asynchronous transfer capabilities to overlap computation with memory movement. Implement double-buffering
schemes where one buffer processes on GPU while another transfers from host memory. This technique can hide transfer
latency entirely for streaming workloads.

### Kernel Optimization

Profile GPU kernels to identify optimization opportunities. Memory bandwidth limitations affect most image processing
kernels more than computational throughput. Optimize memory access patterns to maximize coalesced reads/writes and
minimize bank conflicts in shared memory.

Tune kernel launch parameters for optimal occupancy. Balance thread block size against register usage and shared memory
requirements to maximize simultaneous multiprocessor utilization. Modern GPUs achieve peak performance at 50-75%
theoretical occupancy due to latency hiding mechanisms.

## Memory and Cache Optimization Checklist

### Cache Line Utilization

Verify that data structures align with cache line boundaries to prevent false sharing in multi-threaded scenarios.
Padding structures to 64-byte boundaries eliminates cache line ping-ponging between cores, which can reduce
multi-threaded performance by 10x or more.

Analyze spatial and temporal locality in data access patterns. Group frequently accessed data together to maximize cache
line utilization. Separate read-only data from modified data to prevent unnecessary cache invalidations in multi-core
systems.

### Memory Bandwidth Optimization

Measure achieved memory bandwidth against theoretical system limits. Modern DDR5 systems provide 50-100 GB/s bandwidth,
but poor access patterns may achieve only 10-20% of theoretical maximum. Use streaming stores for write-only data to
bypass cache and maximize bandwidth utilization.

Implement prefetching strategies for predictable access patterns. Software prefetching can improve performance by 20-30%
for memory-bound operations by hiding memory latency. However, excessive prefetching can pollute caches and degrade
performance.

### NUMA Optimization

For NUMA systems, verify that memory allocations and thread affinities maintain NUMA locality. Cross-NUMA memory access
incurs 2-3x latency penalties compared to local access. Use NUMA-aware allocation APIs and bind threads to specific NUMA
nodes for consistent performance.

Profile NUMA traffic using hardware performance counters to identify remote memory accesses. Restructure data
partitioning to minimize cross-NUMA communication. For unavoidable remote accesses, consider replicating read-only data
across NUMA nodes.

## I/O and Storage Optimization Checklist

### File Format Selection

Choose file formats that balance compression efficiency with decode performance. For real-time processing, prefer
formats with hardware decode support (JPEG, H.264) over computationally intensive formats (WebP, AV1). Measure the total
pipeline performance including decode time, not just file size reduction.

Implement format-specific optimizations such as progressive JPEG loading for preview generation or tiled TIFF reading
for large image processing. These techniques can improve perceived performance by 5-10x for user-facing applications.

### Asynchronous I/O

Verify that I/O operations never block computational threads. Implement asynchronous reading with multiple outstanding
requests to maximize storage bandwidth utilization. Modern NVMe drives can sustain 7GB/s with sufficient queue depth but
achieve only 1-2GB/s with synchronous operations.

Use memory-mapped files for random access patterns within large images. Operating system page cache management often
outperforms manual buffering strategies. However, provide hints about access patterns using madvise() or Windows
equivalents to optimize cache behavior.

### Caching Strategies

Implement multi-level caching hierarchies that balance memory usage with performance benefits. In-memory caches should
store decoded, ready-to-process image data, while disk caches can store compressed formats. Size caches based on
available system resources and workload characteristics.

Monitor cache hit rates and adjust sizing dynamically. A well-tuned cache achieves 80-90% hit rates for typical
workloads. Lower hit rates indicate insufficient cache size, while very high rates (>95%) may indicate over-provisioning
that wastes memory.

## Profiling and Measurement Checklist

### Baseline Establishment

Before optimizing, establish performance baselines using production-representative workloads. Measure not just average
performance but also variance and tail latencies. Graphics applications often exhibit bi-modal performance distributions
where occasional slow operations dominate user experience.

Create automated performance regression tests that run with each build. Set acceptable tolerance thresholds (typically
5-10%) to distinguish meaningful regressions from measurement noise. Track performance trends over time to identify
gradual degradations.

### Profiling Tool Selection

Select profiling tools appropriate for the optimization target. CPU profilers like Intel VTune or AMD uProf provide
instruction-level analysis necessary for SIMD optimization. GPU profilers such as NVIDIA Nsight or AMD Radeon GPU
Profiler offer similar capabilities for GPU kernels.

Configure profilers to minimize measurement overhead. Sampling profilers with 1-10ms intervals provide sufficient
resolution for most optimizations while maintaining <5% overhead. Instrument only specific code regions when detailed
analysis is required.

### Metric Selection

Focus on metrics that directly impact user experience. For interactive applications, prioritize latency measurements and
frame time consistency over average throughput. For batch processing, emphasize total throughput and resource
utilization efficiency.

Measure both application-level and system-level metrics. Application metrics like images processed per second provide
business value assessment, while system metrics like CPU utilization and memory bandwidth identify optimization
opportunities.

## Production Deployment Checklist

### Resource Limits

Configure appropriate resource limits for production deployments. Set memory limits 20-30% above typical usage to
accommodate workload variations without triggering out-of-memory conditions. Implement graceful degradation strategies
when approaching resource limits.

Verify that CPU throttling and power management settings align with performance requirements. Disable Intel Turbo Boost
or AMD Precision Boost for latency-sensitive applications to ensure consistent performance. Configure C-states
appropriately to balance power consumption with wake-up latency.

### Monitoring and Alerting

Implement comprehensive monitoring covering all performance-critical metrics. Monitor not just average values but also
percentile distributions (p50, p90, p99) to catch outlier behaviors. Set alerts on both absolute thresholds and
rate-of-change to detect gradual degradations.

Create dashboards that correlate application metrics with system resource utilization. This correlation enables rapid
diagnosis of performance issues. Include business metrics alongside technical metrics to assess performance impact on
user experience.

### Scalability Validation

Test scalability limits before production deployment. Verify that performance scales linearly with additional resources
up to expected maximum loads. Identify bottlenecks that limit scalability and document maximum sustainable throughput.

Implement load shedding mechanisms to maintain quality of service under overload conditions. Prioritize processing based
on business requirements rather than accepting all requests and degrading uniformly. Design circuit breakers that
prevent cascade failures in distributed systems.

## Platform-Specific Optimizations Checklist

### Windows Optimizations

Verify Windows-specific optimizations for graphics applications. Disable fullscreen optimizations for dedicated
rendering applications to prevent Desktop Window Manager interference. Configure GPU scheduling mode based on workload
characteristics - hardware-accelerated scheduling benefits low-latency scenarios.

Implement Windows-specific memory management optimizations. Use VirtualAlloc with large page support for multi-megabyte
allocations to reduce TLB pressure. Configure working set sizes appropriately to prevent excessive paging under memory
pressure.

### Linux Optimizations

Apply Linux-specific tuning for graphics workloads. Configure transparent huge pages based on allocation patterns -
enable for large, long-lived allocations but disable for applications with frequent small allocations. Tune kernel
scheduling parameters for real-time processing requirements.

Optimize graphics driver settings through appropriate kernel modules. For NVIDIA GPUs, configure persistence mode to
eliminate driver initialization overhead. Set appropriate GPU clock speeds and power limits based on performance
requirements and thermal constraints.

### Cross-Platform Considerations

Ensure optimizations remain effective across target platforms. Test SIMD code paths on various CPU architectures to
verify performance portability. Implement platform-specific code paths where necessary but maintain fallback
implementations for compatibility.

Account for platform differences in threading models and synchronization primitives. Windows thread scheduling differs
significantly from Linux, affecting optimal thread pool sizing and work distribution strategies. Profile on all target
platforms to ensure optimizations translate effectively.

## Continuous Optimization Process

### Performance Culture

Establish a performance-focused development culture where optimization is considered throughout the development
lifecycle, not just when problems arise. Include performance requirements in design documents and code reviews.
Celebrate performance improvements alongside feature additions.

Implement performance budgets for critical operations. Define acceptable latency and throughput targets based on user
experience requirements. Reject changes that violate performance budgets without corresponding optimizations elsewhere.

### Knowledge Sharing

Document optimization techniques and lessons learned for team knowledge sharing. Create internal wikis with performance
tips specific to your application domain. Conduct regular performance review sessions where team members share
optimization discoveries.

Maintain a performance optimization backlog prioritized by impact and effort. Regular optimization sprints prevent
performance debt accumulation. Balance optimization work with feature development to ensure sustainable application
performance.

## Conclusion

These checklists provide a framework for systematic performance optimization of graphics processing applications.
Regular application of these guidelines throughout the development lifecycle ensures optimal performance while
maintaining code quality and maintainability. Remember that optimization is an iterative process - not every
optimization applies to every scenario, and measurement must guide optimization priorities. Focus on optimizations that
provide meaningful user experience improvements rather than pursuing theoretical maximum performance at the expense of
development complexity.
